## Discussion
To our knowledge, TPOT-DS is the first AutoML tool to offer the option of feature selection at the group level.
Previously, it was computationally expensive for any AutoML program to process biomedical big data.
TPOT-DS is able to identify the most meaningful group of features to include in the prediction pipeline.
We assess TPOT-DS's holdout prediction accuracy compared to standard TPOT and XGBoost, another state-of-the-art machine learning method.
We apply TPOT-DS to real-world expression data to demonstrate the identification of biologically relevant groups of genes.

Implemented with a strongly typed GP, Template provides more flexibility by allowing users to pre-specify a particular pipeline structure based on their knowledge, which speeds up AutoML process and provides potentially more interpretable results.
For example, in high-dimensional data, dimensionality reduction or feature selection algorithms are preferably included at the beginning of the pipelines via Template to identify important features and, meanwhile, reduce computation time.
For datasets with categorical features, preprocessing operators for encoding those features such as one-hot encoder should be specified in the pipeline structure to improve pipelines' performance.
Template was utilized in this study to specify the DS as the first step of the pipeline, which enables the comparison between the two TPOT implementations, with and without DS.

We simulated data of the similar scale and challenging enough for the models to have similar predictive power as in the real-world RNA-Seq data.
TPOT-DS correctly selects the subset with the most important features in the majority of replications and produces high average holdout accuracy of 0.69.
In both simulated and RNASeq gene expression data, the final TPOT-DS pipeline outperforms that of standard TPOT and XGBoost.
The low holdout accuracies of standard TPOT and XGBoost are expected because of the few signals in a high-dimenional feature space of the data.
Meanwhile, TPOT-DS finds a more compact feature space to operate on, resulting in higher prediction accuracy and lower computational expense.

Interestingly enough, TPOT-DS repeatedly selects DGM-5 to include in the final pipeline.
In a previous study, we showed DGM-5 and DGM-17 enrichment scores were significantly associated with depression severity [@doi:10.1038/s41398-018-0234-3].
We also remarked that DGM-5 contains many genes that are biologically relevant or previously associated with mood disorders [@doi:10.1038/s41398-018-0234-3] and its enriched pathways such as apoptosis indicates a genetic signature of MDD pertaining to shrinkage of brain region-specific volume due to cell loss [@pmid:19125212;@pmid:10384158].
TPOT-DS also selects DGM-13 as a potentially predictive group of features with smaller average holdout accuracy compared to DGM-5 (0.563 $<$ 0.636).
The lack of previously found association of these genes with the phenotype is likely because MDD is a complex disorder of heterogeneous etiology [@doi:10.1016/j.biopsych.2014.07.029].
Hence, the clinical diagnosis is the accumulative result of coordinated variation of many genes in the module, especially ones with high importance scores. 
Future studies to refine and characterize genes in DGM-13 as well as DGM-5 may deploy expression quantitative trait loci (e-QTL) or interaction QTL analysis to discover disease-associated variants [@doi:10.1038/gene.2016.15].

Complexity-interpretability trade-off is an important topic to discuss in the context of AutoML.
While arbitrarily-shaped pipelines may yield predictions competitive to human-level performance, these pipelines are often too complex to be interpretable.
Vice versa, a simpler pipeline with defined steps of operators may be easier to interpret but yield suboptimal prediction accuracy.
Finding the balance between pipeline complexity, model interpretation and generalization remains a challenging task for AutoML application in biomedical big data.
With DS, in the terminology of evolutionary algorithm, each pipeline individual of a TPOT generation during optimization holds lower complexity due to the selected subset's lower dimension compared to that of the entire dataset.
We hope that, with the complexity reduction from imposing a strongly-type GP template and DS, a small loss in dataset-specific predictive accuracy can be compensated by considerable increase in interpretability and generalizability.
In this study, the resulting TPOT-DS pipelines are more interpretable with only two simple optimized operators after the DS: a transformer and a classifier.
In the case of the expression analysis, these pipelines also highlight two small sets of interconnected genes that contain candidates for MDD and related disorders.
Additionally, complexity reduction results in more efficient computation, which is strongly desirable in biomedical big data analysis.

A limitation of the DS analysis is the required pre-definition of subsets prior to executing TPOT-DS.
While this characteristic of an intelligent system is desirable when *a prior* knowledge on the biomedical data is available, it might pose as a challenge when this knowledge is inadequate, such as when analyzing data of a brand-new disease.
Nevertheless, one can perform a clustering method such as *k*-means to group features prior to performing TPOT-DS on the data.
Another limitation of the current implementation of TPOT-DS is its restricted ability to select only one subset.
A future design to support tree structures for Template will enable TPOT-DS to identify more than one subset that have high predictive power of the outcome.
A new operator that combines the data subsets will prove useful in this design.
Extensions of TPOT-DS will also involve overlapping subsets, which will require pipeline complexity reformulation beyond the total number of operators included in a pipeline.
Specifically, in the case of overlapping subsets, the number of features in the selected subset(s) is expected to be an element of the complexity calculation.
Extension of TPOT-DS to GWAS is straightforward.
However, because of the low predictive power of variants in current GWAS, alternative metrics beside accuracy, balanced accuracy or area under the receiving operator characteristic curve will need to be designed and included in the fitness function of TPOT's evolutionary algorithm.

In this study, we developed two new operators for TPOT, Dataset Selector and Template, to enhance its performance on high-dimensional data by simplifying the pipeline structure and reducing the computational expense.
Dataset Selector helps users leverage domain knowledge to narrow down important features for further interpretation, and Template largely increases flexibility of TPOT via customizing pipeline structure.
Future extension and integration of these two operators have the potential to enrich the application of AutoML on different real world biomedical problems.